website/integrations: add Mautic (#13324)
goauthentik/authentik: website/integrations/services/mautic/index.md

---
title: Integrate with Mautic
sidebar_label: Mautic
support_level: community
---

## What is Mautic

> > The World's Largest Open Source Marketing Automation Product

Reviewer: Could you give a better description of the product? Preferably a full/descriptive sentence

Author: I'm a little bit in a dilemma here. It seems that other services always cite a website, but I didn't find a good sentence on Mautics website or on wikipedia. Therefore, I used those bullet points.

Reviewer: It should still be a/a few full sentences. Not bullet points

>
> -- https://mautic.org/

## Preparation

The following placeholders are used in this guide:

- `mautic.company` is the FQDN of the Mautic installation.
- `authentik.company` is the FQDN of the authentik installation.

:::info
This documentation lists only the settings that you need to change from their default values. Be aware that any changes other than those explicitly mentioned in this guide could cause issues accessing your application.
:::

> ### Create a self-signed certificate

Reviewer: Under System > Certificates of the admin interface, it's possible for authentik to generate the certificate for you. Is there a reason why generating the certificate manually is preferred? From that certificate you just generated, it's possible to click the dropdown and the 2 buttons to download the certificate/private key.

Author: Oh, did not find that. However, I still added a section to check for PKCS#1 as I suppose that authentik does not guarantee the creation of PKCS#1 RSA certificates?! (Even though it did in the docker image.)

Mautic and authentik both require a self-signed certificate (including the private key).
Because authentik does not provide the private key of the default certificate, the generation of a new one is necessary:

```sh
openssl genpkey -algorithm RSA -out private_key.pem -pkeyopt rsa_keygen_bits:4096
```

:::info
Mautic only supports RSA keys
:::

> Also, Mautic requires the key to mention RSA in the header and footer. Change the private_key.pem manually if necessary:

Reviewer: > if necessary

What do you mean by this? The output won't change from one run to the other...

If you implement the previous selection, make sure to check whether the files use the PKCS#8 (`-----BEGIN PRIVATE KEY-----`)  or PKCS#1 (`-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----`) format

    - **Private Key**: The contents of the `private_key.pem` file.

2. Because Mautic requires a first name and last name attribute, create two [SAML provider property mappings](../../../docs/users-sources/sources/property-mappings):
    1. The first name mapping which returns everything until the first space (or an empty string if there is no space):
        - **Name**: `SAML-FirstName-from-Name`
        - **SAML Attribute Name**: `FirstName`
        - **Expression**:
            ```py
            names = request.user.name.split(" ", 1)
            if (len(names) == 1):
              return ""
            return names[0]
            ```
    2. The second name mapping which returns everything after the first space (or the whole name if there is no space):
        - **Name**: `SAML-LastName-from-Name`
        - **SAML Attribute Name**: `LastName`
        - **Expression**:
            ```py
            return request.user.name.split(" ", 1)[-1]
            ```
3. Create an [SAML provider](../../../docs/add-secure-apps/providers/saml) with the following values:
    - **ACS URL**: <kbd>https://<em>mautic.company</em>/s/saml/login_check</kbd>

>     - **Issuer**: <kbd><em>mautic.company</em></kbd> (without `https://`)

Reviewer: Since you specify the value to copy in a codeblock, you don't need to tell the user to not include the protocol

    - **First name**: `FirstName` (as per Provider > Preview in authentik)
    - **Last name**: `LastName` (as per Provider > Preview in authentik)
    - **X.509 certificate**: The `certificate.crt` file
    - **Private key**: The `private_key.pem` file

## Troubleshooting

- Error 500 and following message in System Info > Log:
    ```
    mautic.CRITICAL: Uncaught PHP Exception TypeError: "Mautic\UserBundle\Entity\User::getUserIdentifier(): Return value must be of type string, null returned" at /app/bundles/UserBundle/Entity/User.php line 335 {"exception":"[object] (TypeError(code: 0): Mautic\\UserBundle\\Entity\\User::getUserIdentifier(): Return value must be of type string, null returned at /app/bundles/UserBundle/Entity/User.php:335)"}
    ```
    This indicates a problem with the mapping of the attributes ([Mautic configuration](#mautic-configuration) > Step 2 > Email/Username/First Name/Last Name or [authentik configuration](#authentik-configuration) > Step 2).
- _"Unable to verify Signature"_ when logging in: The certificate does not match the key. (E.g. when the certificate was generated without the `RSA`.)

> - _"Assertions must be signed"_ when logging in: Are the checkboxes mentioned in [authentik configuration](#authentik-configuration) > Step 3 checked?

Reviewer: Could you add a "Configuration verification" section? https://github.com/goauthentik/authentik/blob/main/website/integrations/template/service.md?plain=1#L40

---
title: Integrate with Mautic
sidebar_label: Mautic
support_level: community
---

## What is Mautic

> Mautic provides free and open source marketing automation software available to everyone. Free email marketing and lead management software.
>
> -- https://mautic.org/

## Preparation

The following placeholders are used in this guide:

- `mautic.company` is the FQDN of the Mautic installation.
- `authentik.company` is the FQDN of the authentik installation.

:::info
This documentation lists only the settings that you need to change from their default values. Be aware that any changes other than those explicitly mentioned in this guide could cause issues accessing your application.
:::

### Prepare the certificates

Mautic and authentik both require an X.509 certificates.

> Mautic requires the key to be in PKCS#1-format specifically (and thus RSA).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mautic and authentik both require X.509 certificates. However, Mautic specifically requires the key to be in PKCS#1 format (which means it must be RSA).
```

This and previous line which I can't select with this dialog on mobile

> To avoid changing certificates in authentik (e.g., if they are present in PKCS#8), we generate a new one:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To avoid changing certificates in authentik (e.g., if they are present in PKCS#8), go to the authentik Admin interface and generate a new one:
```

> 1. Go to certificates and click on **Generate** and use the following values:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Go to **System -> Certificates** and click on **Generate**. Use the following values:
```

> 1. Go to **System -> Certificates** and click on **Generate**. Use the following values: - **Common Name**: `Mautic Self-signed Certificate`

Reviewer: Do we need to hardcode the name?

Author: No, not necessarily, but in my opinion it makes the (quite complicated) instructions a bit more readable.

    - **Common Name**: `Mautic Self-signed Certificate`
    - **Private key Algorithm**: `RSA`

> 2. Click on the drop-down arrow left of the newly generated certificate and **Download certificate** to `certificate.pem` and **Download Private key** to `private_key.pem`.

Author: Am I correct by assuming that you mean caret instead of carrot?

> 2. Click on the drop-down arrow left of the newly generated certificate and **Download certificate** to `certificate.pem` and **Download Private key** to `private_key.pem`.

Reviewer 2: Welp yep maybe I was hungry at the moment! Thank you!

> 2. Click on the caret (**>**) to the left of the newly generated certificate and click both **Download certificate** (downloads a file named `certificate.pem`) and **Download Private key** (downloads a file named `private_key.pem`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Click the caret (**>**) next to the newly generated certificate, then select **Download certificate** to get the `certificate.pem` file and **Download Private key** to get the `private_key.pem` file.
```

If this makes sense

Author: Yes, I think it's even better because the file names are not exactly `private_key.pem` but only end as such.

Reviewer: ......

Reviewer: i give up

Reviewer: can we please make this entire page technically accurate before proceeding

Author: Well, it's quite hard to find a balance with all those steps involved. Here, the problem is that the Common Name in the previous step (where you asked whether it needs to be hardcoded) directly affects the names of the downloaded certificate/key.
That's why my [original suggestion](https://github.com/goauthentik/authentik/pull/13324/commits/5fd18ba30835a1e396e585fc1d02e855df5a2249#diff-1ddc1bd4786d5f8f051a2dac23e753fe67a41212b3b87c681010adefdab4de13R41) was
> **Download certificate** to `certificate.pem` and **Download Private key** to `private_key.pem`

Reviewer: The original wording seems to indicate that the user would need to rename the file while downloading it, which is not offered in all browsers/at all times (for some reason or other). For now, let's hardcode a common name and get the .pem file names exact for the future?

> 3. Make sure that the `private_key.pem` is in PKCS#1 format. Therefore, open it in a text editor and check that the header footer contain `RSA`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Make sure that the `private_key.pem` is in PKCS#1 format. To verify, open the file in a text editor and check that the header footer contain `RSA`:
```

> 3. Make sure that the `private_key.pem` is in PKCS#1 format. To verify, open the file in a text editor and check that the header footer contain `RSA`:

Reviewer: A very rough draft of what I'd potentially say

---

3. Make sure that the `private_key.pem` is in PKCS#1 format. To verify, use `grep` to check for `RSA` in the header and footer of the file:
    ```sh
    grep "RSA PRIVATE KEY" private_key.pem
    ```
    If the command returns the correct match (e.g., `-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----`), the key is in PKCS#1 format, and you can skip steps 4 to 7.

4. If the key is not in PKCS#1 format, add `RSA` after `BEGIN`/`END` in `private_key.pem` as shown below and save the file as `private_key_new.pem`:
    ```diff
    - -----BEGIN PRIVATE KEY-----
    + -----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
    ```
    and
    ```diff
    - -----END PRIVATE KEY-----
    + -----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
    ```

5. Regenerate the X.509 certificate by first creating a signing request using the following command:
    ```sh
    openssl req -new -key private_key.pem -out request.csr
    ```
    This will prompt you to enter values for the certificate, which you can choose freely. For some fields, you can use authentik's generated values:
    - **Organization Name**: `authentik`
    - **Organizational Unit Name**: `Self-signed`
    - **Common Name**: `Mautic Self-signed Certificate`

6. Next, generate the certificate with the (now) PKCS#1-compliant key and the previously generated signing request using the following command:
    ```sh
    openssl x509 -req -days 365 -in request.csr -signkey private_key.pem -out certificate_new.pem
    ```

7. In authentik, navigate to **System > Certificates** and click **Edit** on the previously generated certificate. Click on the description below the text inputs to activate the inputs.
    - **Certificate**: Enter the contents of `certificate_new.pem`
    - **Private Key**: Enter the contents of `private_key_new.pem`
    - Click **Update**

Reviewer: Tho, again, it would be best to get a 100% reproducible method, preferably directly in authentik, which would guarantee the correct key format. Also, if you regenerate the certificate in soon-to-be step 5, have you ensured everything still works fine later on? I don't know that much cryptography wise, this might be a stupid question

Author: As per my understanding it should all work the same.
For authentik, I couldn't find an option to force the generation to be PKCS#1 compliant and Mautic (or more specific the framework Mautic uses) explicitly checks for those headers.
While the current (docker) version of authentik actually generates PKCS#1 certificates, I guess that future versions of authentik won't be guaranteed to do that as well?

Reviewer: I think it's best to assume we will continue generating PKCS#1 certs for now

Reviewer: Format doesn't seem to have been changed since the feature was first introduced (5 years). It will most certainly stay the same

    - -----BEGIN PRIVATE KEY-----
    + -----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
    ```
    and
    ```diff
    - -----END PRIVATE KEY-----
    + -----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
    ```
    If the key contains `RSA` in header and footer, the certificate preparation is complete and you can skip steps 4 to 6.
4. Add `RSA` after `BEGIN`/`END` in `private_key.pem` as shown in step 3 and save the file as `private_key_new.pem`.

> 5. Regenerate the X.509-certificate by first creating a signing request:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Regenerate the X.509-certificate by first creating a signing request, using the following command:
```

5. Regenerate the X.509-certificate by first creating a signing request:

    ```sh
    openssl req -new -key private_key.pem -out request.csr
    ```

>     This will prompt to enter values for the certificate which you can choose freely. For some, you can use authentiks generated values:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This will prompt to enter values for the certificate which you can choose freely. For some, you can use authentik's generated values:
```

>     This will prompt to enter values for the certificate which you can choose freely. For some, you can use authentik's generated values:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This will prompt you to enter values for the certificate which you can choose freely. For some, you can use authentik's generated values:
```

    - **Organization Name**: `authentik`
    - **Organizational Unit Name**: `Self-signed`
    - **Common Name**: `Mautic Self-signed Certificate`

>     Next, regenerate the certificate:

Author: Yes, the next step is to generate the actual certificate that will replace the one generated by authentik.
Maybe `Next, generate the certificate with the (now) PKCS#1-compliant key and the generated signing request:` would clear that up?

    ```sh
    openssl x509 -req -days 365 -in request.csr -signkey private_key.pem -out certificate_new.pem
    ```

> 6. Update the previously generated certificate in authentik:

Reviewer 2: How, what are the stps... please type the steps out.

>     Next, generate the certificate with the (now) PKCS#1-compliant key and the previously generated signing request:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    5. Next, generate the certificate with the (now) PKCS#1-compliant key and the previously generated signing request, using the following command:
```

    - **Certificate**: The contents of `certificate_new.pem`
    - **Private Key**: The contents of `private_key_new.pem`

## authentik configuration

> 1. Because Mautic requires a first name and last name attribute, create two [SAML provider property mappings](../../../docs/users-sources/sources/property-mappings):

Reviewer 2: Thank you for linking to the Docs!

>     1. The first name mapping returns everything until the first space (or an empty string if there is no space):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    1. The first name mapping returns everything up to the first space (or an empty string if there is no space):
```

> ## authentik configuration

Reviewer: The certificate mess from above ^^ should be included under the authentik configuration section. Could you also update this to be in line with the new template? https://github.com/goauthentik/authentik/pull/12929 should be merged to main soon, but it's getting blocked by something else. Here's an example from another PR which has property mapping configuration: https://github.com/goauthentik/authentik/pull/13144/files#diff-e5710672bf55030bb3352ed289b1acc49be1a41038ab3f2ceee66da1d9d1d713R29 Thanks

        - **SAML Attribute Name**: `FirstName`
        - **Expression**:
            ```py
            names = request.user.name.split(" ", 1)
            if (len(names) == 1):
              return ""
            return names[0]
            ```
    2. The second name mapping returns everything after the first space (or the whole name if there is no space):
        - **Name**: `SAML-LastName-from-Name`
        - **SAML Attribute Name**: `LastName`
        - **Expression**:
            ```py
            return request.user.name.split(" ", 1)[-1]
            ```
2. Create an [SAML provider](../../../docs/add-secure-apps/providers/saml) with the following values:
    - **ACS URL**: <kbd>https://<em>mautic.company</em>/s/saml/login_check</kbd>
    - **Issuer**: <kbd><em>mautic.company</em></kbd>
    - **Binding**: `Post`
    - Advanced protocol settings > **Signing Certificate**: `Mautic Self-signed Certificate`, check `Sign assetions` and `Sign responses`
    - Advanced protocol settings > **Property Mappings**: Add `SAML-FirstName-from-Name` and `SAML-LastName-from-Name`
3. Save the provider, view it, and download the metadata file to `authentik_meta.xml`

## Mautic configuration

> 1. When running behind an SSL-terminating reverse proxy (e.g. traefik): In Configuration > System Settings, make sure that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. When running behind an SSL-terminating reverse proxy (e.g. traefik): In **Configuration > System Settings**, make sure that:
```

    - the **Site URL** starts with `https://`
    - **trusted proxies** includes the IP-address of the reverse proxy

> 2. In Configuration > User/Authentication Settings, set the following values:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. In **Configuration > User/Authentication Settings**, set the following values:
```

> 1. When running behind an SSL-terminating reverse proxy (e.g. traefik): In **Configuration > System Settings**, make sure that:

Reviewer: This could be added as a :::note instead as the steps below should be more on configuring SAML

>     - **Entity ID for the IDP**: <kbd>https://<em>mautic.company</em></kbd>

Reviewer: Knowing that Entity ID = Issuer, shouldn't the value of the issuer on line 91 be identical to this one?

Author: As per the [mautic docs](https://docs.mautic.org/en/5.x/authentication/authentication.html), it should be as described.

Reviewer: We can make it whatever we want, right? To prevent confusion, shouldn't we set it to `authentik` or similar

Author: Mautic does not allow distinct configurations of Entity ID and Issuer.
In the docs, they just mentioned the one to be with `https://` and the other one to be without.
I don't know if it's hardcoded in their system (or even affects their system at all, because I'm not that deep in the authentication subject either).
For me, the values from their documentation worked. As per "never change a running system," I didn't further investigate.

    - **Identity provider metadata file**: The `authentik_meta.xml` file
    - **Default role for created users**: Choose one to enable creating users.
    - **Email**: `http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/ws/2005/05/identity/claims/emailaddress` (as per provider > preview in authentik)
    - **Username**: `http://schemas.goauthentik.io/2021/02/saml/username` (as per provider > preview in authentik)
    - **First name**: `FirstName` (as per Provider > Preview in authentik)
    - **Last name**: `LastName` (as per Provider > Preview in authentik)
    - **X.509 certificate**: The `certificate.crt` file
    - **Private key**: The `private_key.pem` file

## Configuration verification

> To confirm that authentik is properly configured with Mautic, open a new incognito/private window or another browser and

Reviewer: Could you remove the new lines in the middle of sentences?

:::

In **Configuration > User/Authentication Settings**, set the following values:

- **Entity ID for the IDP**: <kbd>https://<em>mautic.company</em></kbd>
- **Identity provider metadata file**: The <kbd><em>mautic-provider</em>\_authentik_meta.xml</kbd> file
- **Default role for created users**: Choose one to enable creating users.
- **Email**: `http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/ws/2005/05/identity/claims/emailaddress` (as per provider > preview in authentik)
- **Username**: `http://schemas.goauthentik.io/2021/02/saml/username` (as per provider > preview in authentik)
- **First name**: `FirstName` (as per Provider > Preview in authentik)
- **Last name**: `LastName` (as per Provider > Preview in authentik)
- **X.509 certificate**: The `certificate.crt` file
- **Private key**: The `private_key.pem` file
  Click on **Save**.

## Configuration verification

To confirm that authentik is properly configured with Mautic, open a new incognito/private window or another browser and login at `mautic.company`.
By using an incognito/private window or other browser, you can still access the configuration interface of Mautic if anything went wrong.

## Troubleshooting

> :::danger

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### `Uncaught PHP Exception TypeError`
```

```

> mautic.CRITICAL: Uncaught PHP Exception TypeError: "Mautic\UserBundle\Entity\User::getUserIdentifier(): Return value must be of type string, null returned" at /app/bundles/UserBundle/Entity/User.php line 335 {"exception":"[object] (TypeError(code: 0): Mautic\\UserBundle\\Entity\\User::getUserIdentifier(): Return value must be of type string, null returned at /app/bundles/UserBundle/Entity/User.php:335)"}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
> mautic.CRITICAL: Uncaught PHP Exception TypeError: "Mautic\UserBundle\Entity\User::getUserIdentifier(): Return value must be of type string, null returned" at /app/bundles/UserBundle/Entity/User.php line 335 {"exception":"[object] (TypeError(code: 0): Mautic\\UserBundle\\Entity\\User::getUserIdentifier(): Return value must be of type string, null returned at /app/bundles/UserBundle/Entity/User.php:335)"}
```
```

```

> :::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

This message in Mautic's **System Info > Log in** with an error 500 on its login page indicates a problem with the mapping of the attributes (See [Mautic configuration](#mautic-configuration) > Email/Username/First Name/Last Name or [Create property mappings](#create-property-mappings) > Step 2 or [Create an application and provider in authentik](#create-an-application-and-provider-in-authentik) > Step 2.

<hr />

> :::danger

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### `Unable to verify Signature`
```

> > Unable to verify Signature

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> `Unable to verify Signature`
```

:::

> when logging in indicates that the certificate does not match the private key.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This error occurs when logging in indicates that the certificate does not match the private key.
```

(E.g. when the certificate was generated without the `RSA` and only the private key was changed afterwards.)

<hr />

> :::danger

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Assertions
```

> > Assertions must be signed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> `Assertions must be signed`
```

> :::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

when logging in indicates that the `Sign assertions` and `Sign responses` settings were not checked in authentik.
(See [Create an application and provider in authentik](#create-an-application-and-provider-in-authentik) > Step 2.)

<hr />

> :::danger

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Invalid private key
```

> > Private key is invalid. It should begin with `-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----` or `-----BEGIN ENCRYPTED PRIVATE KEY-----`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
> Private key is invalid. It should begin with `-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----` or `-----BEGIN ENCRYPTED PRIVATE KEY-----`
```
```

> :::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
